# CRDDS_Project_Comparing_Profit_and_Diabetes_Incidence

Motivation:
I’m sure we have all heard the history behind doctors’ first means of manufacturing insulin to treat diabetes patients: one of the greatest breakthroughs in medicine was sold to a university for only a dollar, its discoverers (Frederick Banting, Charles Best, and JJR Macleod) stating that “Insulin does not belong to me, it belongs to the world”. It appears we have strayed from the initial path set by the founders of insulin.
I am in a position where I often come into contact with patients diagnosed with diabetes. I have seen first-hand the extent at which diabetes medications are dispensed, as well as the hardship that is forced upon them when they see the price they have to pay. I wanted to use this opportunity provided by this project to explore the statistics a little more between the profits gained by pharmaceutical companies and manufacturers of these medications versus the prevalence of diabetes diagnoses in recent years.

Question:
The incidence of diabetes diagnoses has increased dramatically in the last two decades, more than doubling in quantity from 2000 to 2021 (CITE). In turn, we see a dramatic increase in the production and use of anti-diabetic products, such as oral medications like metformin (a medication that manages bodily functions by affecting the production and intake of blood sugar), or injections such as Novolin R (a short-acting insulin that helps glucose-intake of cells, thus controlling blood-sugar levels). Following these trends, we also see an increase in the profits of major pharmaceutical companies.

Does this trend of increasing profits follow that of increasing diabetes diagnoses? To put it bluntly, is there a trend indicative of pharmaceutical companies taking advantage of the current diabetes epidemic plaguing the United States?

Description:
I used Jupyter Notebook with Pandas and plotly to visualize data retrieved from statista to begin researching this question, namely that related to profits of pharmaceutical industries (which I pair with insurance) and incidence of diabetes in the United States. I created simple plots relating profit and number of cases versus year to get an idea of the overall trend and applied a linear trendline to quantify this trend. As will be explained, a weak comparison can be made relating profit and number of cases of diabetes, but further analysis would be unwise with the data I have pulled.

Data Set Evaluation:
In regards to finding data to explore this question, I actually found it rather difficult to find data that could be easily compared timeline-wise, without gaps or without focusing on just one company. The key comparison I sought to make was between profits based on anti-diabetic medications and overall incidence of diabetes. As can be seen from my plots, the only data I found in the repository I used regarding money made from diabetes medications had gaps and spanned a very short number of years. I still included the data as an aside to compare to the trend in increasing profits. Overall, this set of data violates one of the FAIR principles of interoperability. As a result, I instead tried to make a loose comparison between overall profits of pharmaceutical companies and diabetes diagnoses.
Very clearly, there is an obvious positive trend between increase in profit of pharmaceutical companies and that of diabetes incidence. A weak argument could be made from this data that a portion of the increasing profits was gained from raising the price of diabetes medications at the expense of patients. Pairing this with the data on revenue from anti-diabetic medications, this idea is more supported. A trendline was applied to both sets of data, increasing profits and increasing diagnoses, to get a vague, quantitative idea of the overall increase. Pharmaceutical companies saw an average increase of 2.2 billion dollars in profit per year between 2012 and 2021, while we saw an increase of 0.2903 million cases of diabetes diagnoses per year for the same range of time. It is immediately obvious that acceleration of increasing profits far surpasses that of increasing diabetes cases.
Based on the nature of the data however, it would be dangerous to attempt to extract any further meaning from these results. Overall profits of the pharmaceutical industry obviously included much more than just diabetes medications. Using the few data points regarding revenue from diabetes medications, an argument could begin, but a better dataset would be needed to attempt to draw any conclusions (such as “the bulk of pharmacy profits come from the increasing prices of diabetes medications). Additionally, the net profits were based on the National Association of Insurance Commissioners' report, which only includes data regarding companies who file reports with the NAIC (meaning this is not all-encompassing).
The data I used in this project was easily findable and accessible via statista. I was able to better access this data through the University of Colorado’s access to such repositories. The datasets were also well documented and based on reliable sources (such as the CDC), leading me to trust the reliability of this data. The data I pulled from the site was rich in metadata as well, describing the sources of the data, when it was released, and links to original sources to explore the original home of that data. As such, I believe this data meets the requirements of Findable, Accessible, and Reusable via the FAIR principles.

For future studies, I would definitely explore more data repositories as I believe that there is more and better data out there that would better answer my question. Truthfully, walking into this bootcamp, I had no idea what meta-data or what data repositories were. I was a bit shocked jumping into these topics; I have ever only explored quantitative data that I have gathered in experiments. Jumping into the world of data repositories and their organization was a little wild to put it lightly. Visualizing qualitative data and exploring repositories was a new challenge for me! While I believe the data I pulled from was good data, I believe the correlation I attempted to make was too weak, which became very apparent the further I dived into the project. If I were to redo the project, I would be more careful of what datasets I sought to analyze relative to my question, ensure I can find good datasets that can fully address my question (without gaps!), and explore different repositories.

Sources:
Prevalence of diagnosed diabetes among adults aged 18 and over in the U.S. from 2000 to 2021

Number of U.S. Americans with diagnosed diabetes from 1980 to 2021*(in millions)

U.S. Health Insurance Industry Analysis Report (includes net profits data)

An additional piece of data I found interesting regarding this topic:
Insulin human out-of-pocket cost in the U.S. from 2004 to 2020*(in U.S. dollars)

